so I got a question about the future of
First Nations in Canada which is partly
a purely political issue and it's partly
an educational issue okay so I want to
say issue you want to say question it's
a question that's gonna be answered
partly in the in the purest political
sense it's gonna be decided in
Parliament it's gonna be decided on the
streets
it could be decided through our
revolution but that seems unlikely
seems like armed uprisings are not going
to be that important in the 21st century
and in determining this issue could be
could be and there are some really
extreme circumstances that any outside
observer would say would justify armed
uprisings so that that may be in the
cards nevertheless 21st century as
pathetic and self-destructive as those
violent uprisings may be nevertheless
that is definitely possible in terms of
what happens in the next few decades of
these negotiations for the future but
yeah on the one hand there's there are
purely political decisions to be made
about the future First Nations and then
there are educational decisions there's
a question of whether or not the Cree
language is going to go extinct so in
sitting of whatever say on this one I
remember at once at a conversation with
a guy it he was a full time teacher at
the Korean language I was at that time a
full time student of the Korean language
and he was very particular and
clarifying to me in terms the use of
verbs in English he didn't see his job
description as preserving the curry
language he saw his his his job as
promulgating the Korean language we
don't use the word promulgate that often
English and that really made me stop and
think about how he sees himself how he
sees his job how he sees the struggle
for these languages and these people in
the future and the interesting point cos
for me also my involvement with First
Nations was very forward-looking
I wasn't interested in studying or
preserving their traditional culture I'm
interested in the future of these
languages in the future these people of
course have interests in their history
to some extent but I basically have a
forward-looking engage with these issues
now by contrast I once saw a TV
interview with a First Nations language
advocate from the West Coast and on the
west coast of Canada the situation is
really different because you have really
small pockets of languages and they're
all close to extinction and there's no
easy way forward in terms of merging
into larger units you don't mean that
the threat of language distinction is
very real and it's very different though
so this this particular guy being
interviewed he was working to revive a
language that I think got down to only
five living speakers some of that the
last five or ten people who could speak
this language and then he revived it
partly just through the glory of the
Internet
he called for volunteers he asked people
to just volunteer this language
regardless of their ethnic heritage he
said hey look this language is close to
extinction I want it gets people
together and so you know that was why
this was a TV news item was it was a
relatively fun and upbeat attitude
towards very serious issue and he had
some success so I forget he got it up to
fifty people or something who could
speak this language and had some fun
with it and obviously because the
language was so close to extinction I
think he did make some simplifications
to the language he made it easier to
learn you know and put together an
easy-to-use dictionary and this kind of
thing you know easy to use educational
materials but of course there's a
question there too if you're doing that
to what extent is this becoming a
fictional language you know a
constructed language people like to say
is it becoming something like elvish
from Lord of the Rings
or you really accurately you know
preserving and promulgating an
indigenous language so those questions
but in the interview with this guy I
remember he said and you know this was a
this was his official position
he said he recognizes that the language
he's supporting will never be a language
used to buy a hot dog at a hot dog stand
in downtown Vancouver or in any big city
but that he sees the role of the
language as being something that's just
special within that community when the
people who have that that ancestry or
that heritage or people who want to join
people who are become part of the
community and I remember sitting and
listening to that and before I heard him
say that I really thought you know that
is the opposite of what I believe it to
me it really matters that at First
Nations University of Canada the
no-smoking signs are in English I don't
want that I want them to say no smoking
in Cree to me it really matters that
when you go up to a bank machine in that
part of Canada that time the bay
Sheena's with eight buttons four
languages it is mentioned there were
eight buttons on the screen you could
also use the number of buttons and the
language choices are English French or
Chinese to me it really matters that we
have Cree a jib lei Mohawk we have some
other buttons there for some other
languages why because this is Canada I
you know theoretically I really do want
there to be hot dog vendors I'm vegan so
it's not the best example for me to me
it really matters whether or not in
downtown Vancouver there is a role for
indigenous languages in that culture in
that society I am actually not
comfortable at all with these languages
and cultures being remaindered to
reservations I mean remainder it is
maybe nothing but you know guess it is
what I mean you know the actual process
of creating reservations of putting up
fences and walls and saying those people
exist over there that culture exists
over there that is you know that is
something very fundamentally I opposed
of course I think it was bad
historically looking back what the point
is we're now looking forward now looking
at the change we can make in the future
and I feel like saying no goddamnit
either this language exists at the bank
you look at the bank machine at the
hotdog stand or it doesn't exist at all
and this is a really false attitude to
think you can you can preserve a
language within those those dotted lines
and you know no no no back when is the
First Nations University of Canada I
talked the professor's about getting the
first physics textbook in the Korean
language the first chemistry textbook
and I said if we don't do this the
language dies another specific example
what about the Constitution of Canada
what about the Constitution United
States if you've ever seen the
Constitution in the United States
written in a native language it's
written in English of course you know
Constitution Canada's written English in
French why you know why either this
matters enough to be in these languages
also you know of course there are more
difficult questions probably the hardest
thing is policing or court you know can
you plead your own case in course it
heard me
can you plead your own case in court can
you appear in Parliament and talk
politics in these languages they're not
on and on and on it goes so this is an
answer to a question the actual wording
of the question I was given is what do I
think about the reconciliation process
and my response that's kind of parallel
to that anecdote I told about the
teacher who didn't want to talk about
extinction and preservation he wants use
the word promulgate I do not see this in
terms of reconciliation at all like to
me that's irrelevant I don't care if
you're reconciled or not I care about
when you go to the bank machine what
language is there at the bank machine I
care about even in theory can you go
into things can you go into the bank and
get a loan you know as a native person
it's a huge bear I mean that always is
with racism that's one of the most
telling signs of racism do black people
really have equal access to a mortgage
or a home loan alone to build a new home
or something - white people of course
for most of most American history the
answer was no the racism was most
obvious in getting a loan at a bank but
you know do Native people really have
the ability to do that as Native people
just because of racism willing but then
do they have the ability that in their
own language it's a huge huge step to
fill out a loan application in Korea or
Ghibli you know to me that has nothing
to do with reconciliation if you just
think about it implicitly what I'm
talking about is a very different very
different vision of the future very
different kind of society and there are
precedents you know one of the most
extreme is Switzerland somebody thinks
of Switzerland Switzerland is a modern
Western democracy they have all the good
things of a democratic society but they
take really seriously the rights of
indigenous languages including some very
small languages like Romansh Romansh ROM
OSH I've met I want a member of that of
that group which is a latin derived
language native there including a course
there are Italians the Swiss Italians
and so and so forth and even Swiss
German itself where they take really
seriously the obligation to
education in these languages to access
government services in these languages
you know Switzerland has done it in some
ways an example like Switzerland I think
is a positive sample of the way forward
and you know China gets a lot of bad
press for different ethnic groups in
China it's a different story
but I got to tell you where we are right
now into Hong China when I walk down the
street every road sign is in three
languages every single road sign all of
the government services signs they're in
Chinese de Hong died and gene pool gene
pool is also known as catch N it's the
same language you know and they take
very seriously there are very serious
foundations for each of those groups the
the best high school here the best high
school is the ethnic minority high
school which is devoted to serving those
people not the worst you'll never see
that in Canada never once do you see
white people saying they're competing to
get their kids into a Cree high school
competing to get their kids into a and
Ojibwe high school the Chinese people
compete to try to get their kids into
the ethnic minority high school and
primary school and middle school by the
way because it's the best school the
best the most elite education here is
the special education for for Native
people it's excellent
you know the pursuit of excellence in
education for Native people and yes I
mean at my own University campus last
night I was taking the bus home you know
they were they were practicing tribal
dances on campus that is mentioned as
that as the bus went out last night as I
was on the way home from work now you
know obviously some of that stuff is a
little bit Disneyland but hey that's
okay I'm not I'm not so opposed to
Disney way video literally we have
people in tribal garb dancing with
swords and bows and arrows that's part
of the preservation of culture here too
you guys probably get that's not really
the side of the game I relate to
positively that's not really what I'm
into but some people are and that's
gonna be a piece in the puzzle too yes
you know that kind of you know surface
level cultural preservation so yeah
that's really my my response is to me
the word reconciliation is irrelevant
you know I don't want reconciliation I
want to win like I really see
as a struggle where the question is will
Native people win a place for themselves
in Parliament got you know right now
there is ZERO representation of Native
people in Parliament there is ZERO
representation of Native people in the
you know the Bureau of Indian Affairs
ezio who's ridiculous it's just a white
man assigned as an as a portfolio at a
parliament to be the the dictator over
First Nations we have a ridiculous
colonial system of government legacy of
British parliamentary system and so on
it makes absolutely no sense for our
First Nations people our government and
so on there are very obvious political
changes that need to happen but none of
them can be explained in terms of
reconciliation there are very obvious
changes that need to happen in terms of
just land ownership who owns Toronto
Island I could give a million examples
of that terms of settlement land
ownership whose gonna do something
really positive and visionary for the
future in terms of you know giving First
Nations the foothold in this country
that Ukrainians got Ukrainians God and
took for granted look up the history of
preemption in British Columbia
they were handing out valuable farmland
farmland that's now worth millions of
dollars they're handing a personal land
for free to anyone who was white at
exactly the same time they were taking
away from native people this is not
ancient history and those people the
people who got preemption in British
Columbia the people who got that land
for free they're today the millionaire
class of BC they're now the wealthy in
that province but in order you know so
we did that to help Ukrainian immigrants
we handed out free land Ukrainians and
Germans and poles and those the people
who settled Western Canada but you know
they didn't even speak English you know
the just saying it wasn't like the
British Empire only only benefited white
British people but it only benefited
white people it was a very very clear
racial racist in Rachel's mandate so in
terms of really transferring a lot of
land and valuable land not remote land
nobody wants you know and that we kicked
them off then when we discovered
diamonds are gold under that remote land
then they get kicked off again and this
is a huge pattern in Canada because we
give them what we think is worthless lay
but no I can't I can't see that in terms
of reconciliation it's not a question of
two sides that need to be reconciled
it's a it's a disaster that we need to
dig our way out of and either we're
going to dig our way out of it before
the languages go extinct or after